# Databases
A **database** is a structured object with the purpose of stored information.

Is divided in two parts:
- *Data*: the actual stored descriptive information (raw data).
- *Metadata*: describes the structure applied by the database (customer table definition).

The databases are manage by a *Database Management System* (DBMS).
## Database vs Dataset
A **dataset** is a collection of related data, often presented in a table format.

|                 | Dataset                | Database                               |
| :-------------- | ---------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| Purpose         | Analysis and reporting | Storage, retrieval, and manipulation   |
| Structure       | Tabular                | Tables, indexes, views, and procedures |
| Storage formats | CSV, XLSX, Jason       | MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle              |
## Database vs Database model
A **database model** provides a blueprint for how data is stored, organized, and manipulated in a database.

A **database** is the actual collection of data managed by a DBMS, while a **database model** is the abstract design that defines how that data is structured and related.
### Types of database models
- **Hierarchical Model** (1950)
	- Data is organized into a tree-like structure.
	- The tables on this model take on a child-parent relationship.
	- Each child table has a single parent table.
	- Each parent table can have multiple child tables.
- **Network Model** (1960)
	- Data is organized into a graph structure with nodes and links.
	- Allows child tables to have more than one parent.
- **Relational Model** (1970)
	- Data is organized into tables with rows and columns (records and fields, respectively).
	- Improves on the restriction of a hierarchical structure.
	- Any table can be accessed directly without having to access all parent objects.
- **Object-Oriented Model** (1990)
	- Data is represented as objects, similar to object-oriented programming.
	- Three-dimensional structure to data.
	- Efficient for finding unique items and performs poorly when retrieving more than a single item.

In this course we are going to focus only in the Relational Database Model.