# History
- Companies used to use the **Hierarchical Model**
- <u>Problem</u>: large quantities of data.
- In 1970, Edgar F. Codd published the paper *"A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks,”* theorized the relational model.
- In 1973, Don Chamberlin and Ray Boyce went to the San Jose Research Laboratory
	- Joined the **System R** with the Codd's model.
	- Called this project **Sequel** (Structured English Query Language)
- In 1974, Ray died.
- In 1976, a more complete Sequel language design was published.
- In 1977, because of the trademark issue (a product of a British engineering firm), they rename as **SQL** (Structured Query Language).

See more about the history of SQL [here](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6359709) and more about relational model [here](https://www.ibm.com/topics/relational-databases).

# SQL
SQL, or Structured Query Language, is a language designed to allow both technical and non-technical users query, manipulate, and transform data from a relational database. And due to its simplicity, SQL databases provide safe and scalable storage for millions of websites and mobile applications.
## Concepts
- **Record**: A row that holds the data on a single observation or entity.
- **Field**: A column that stores a specific piece of information for all records in the table.
- **Table**: A two-dimensional structure composed of fields (columns) and records (rows).
    - Fields (columns) are defined during table creation.
    - There is no limit to the number of records (rows) in a table.
- **Relational database**: A collection of related tables that store data in a structured format, with relationships established between them.
- **Unique identifiers**: A set of unique values, often integers, used to identify individual records within a table. These are also known as _Primary Keys_.
- **Foreign Key**: A field (or collection of fields) in one table that uniquely identifies a row in another table. The foreign key establishes and enforces a link between the data in two tables.
- **Query**: A request for data or information from a database. Queries are written in SQL and can retrieve, insert, update, or delete data.
## Conventions
### Table names
Should be:
- In lowercase.
- Without spaces, use underscore (`_`) instead.
- Refer to a collective group, or to be plural.
- Different from other field names.
- Different from other table names.

Examples of bad names to refer a tables:
1. `Movies` *uppercase*
2. `mexican movies` *with space*
3. `movie` *singular*
4. See [*Example 1*](02.1.Examples.png)
5. See [*Example 2*](02.1.Examples.png)
## Data types
## Relations
### One-to-one
### One-to-many
### Many-to-many

## Flavors
