---
tags:
  - "#SQL"
---
# History
- Companies used to use the **Hierarchical Model**
- <u>Problem</u>: large quantities of data.
- In 1970, Edgar F. Codd published the paper *"A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks,”* theorized the relational model.
- In 1973, Don Chamberlin and Ray Boyce went to the San Jose Research Laboratory
	- Joined the **System R** with the Codd's model.
	- Called this project **Sequel** (Structured English Query Language)
- In 1974, Ray died.
- In 1976, a more complete Sequel language design was published.
- In 1977, because of the trademark issue (a product of a British engineering firm), they rename as **SQL** (Structured Query Language).

See more about the history of SQL [here](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6359709) and more about relational model [here](https://www.ibm.com/topics/relational-databases).

# SQL
SQL, or Structured Query Language, is a language designed to allow both technical and non-technical users query, manipulate, and transform data from a relational database. And due to its simplicity, SQL databases provide safe and scalable storage for millions of websites and mobile applications.
## Concepts
- **Record**: A row that holds the data on a single observation or entity.
- **Field**: A column that stores a specific piece of information for all records in the table.
- **Table**: A two-dimensional structure composed of fields (columns) and records (rows).
    - Fields (columns) are defined during table creation.
    - There is no limit to the number of records (rows) in a table.
- **Relational database**: A collection of related tables that store data in a structured format, with relationships established between them.
- **Unique identifiers**: A set of unique values, often integers, used to identify individual records within a table. These are also known as _Primary Keys_.
- **Foreign Key**: A field (or collection of fields) in one table that uniquely identifies a row in another table. The foreign key establishes and enforces a link between the data in two tables.
- **Query**: A request for data or information from a database. Queries are written in SQL and can retrieve, insert, update, or delete data.
## Best practices
For best practices we follow the [SQL Style Guide](https://www.sqlstyle.guide/) by Holywell.
### Table
Table names should be:
- In lowercase.
- Without spaces, use underscore (`_`) instead.
- Refer to a collective group, or to be plural.
- Different from other field names.
- Different from other table names.

Examples of bad names to refer a tables:
1. `Movies` *uppercase*
2. `mexican movies` *with space*
3. `movie` *singular*
4. See [*Example 1*](02.1.Examples.png)
5. See [*Example 2*](02.1.Examples.png)
### Fields
- Always use the singular name.
- Where possible avoid simply using `id` as the primary identifier for the table.
- Do not add a column with the same name as its table and vice versa.
- Always use lowercase except where it may make sense not to such as proper nouns.
## Data types
Data types in SQL define the kind of data that can be stored in a field.

<u>Note</u>: each field must have a unique data type.
#### Numeric
- **INT**: Stores integer numbers. Common variants include `TINYINT`, `SMALLINT`, `MEDIUMINT`, `INT`, and `BIGINT`, which differ in the range of values they can store.
- **DECIMAL(p, s)**: Stores fixed-point numbers with precision `p` (total number of digits) and scale `s` (number of digits after the decimal point). Often used for financial data.
- **FLOAT** and **DOUBLE**: Store approximate floating-point numbers. `FLOAT` typically uses less storage but has lower precision than `DOUBLE`.
#### Character
- **CHAR(n)**: Stores fixed-length strings. If the data is shorter than `n` characters, it is padded with spaces. Suitable for fields like postal codes or fixed-length codes.
- **VARCHAR(n)**: Stores variable-length strings, where `n` defines the maximum length. It uses only the space required for the actual data, plus a small overhead for length information.
- **TEXT**: Stores large amounts of text data. Variants include `TINYTEXT`, `TEXT`, `MEDIUMTEXT`, and `LONGTEXT`, depending on the maximum storage capacity needed.
#### Date and Time
- **DATE**: Stores date values in the format `YYYY-MM-DD`.
- **TIME**: Stores time values in the format `HH:MM:SS`.
- **DATETIME**: Stores both date and time in the format `YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS`.
- **TIMESTAMP**: Similar to `DATETIME`, but often used for tracking changes in records. It typically stores the date and time in UTC (Coordinated Universal Time).
- **YEAR**: Stores a year value, usually in a two-digit or four-digit format.

<u>Note</u>: In Python, `datetime64` is a data type primarily used in the NumPy library, designed to handle date and time data with high precision. It is particularly useful in scientific computing, data analysis, and when working with time series data.
## Basic Commands
### Create Table 
Creates a new table in the database.
```SQL
CREATE TABLE table_name (
    field_1 datatype,
    field_2 datatype,
    ....
    field_n datatype,
);
```
If the table name has space (not supposed), need to use `""`
### Insert
Adds new data to a table.
```SQL
INSERT INTO table_name 
	(field_1, field_2, ..., field_n)
VALUES
	-- one record
	(value_1, value_2, ..., value_n)
	-- another record
	(value_1, value_2, ..., value_n);
```
You can add as many records as you need.

### SELECT
Retrieves data from a database.
```SQL
SELECT 
	field_1, 
	field_2,
	...
	field_n 
FROM table_name;
```
If you want to retrieve all the fields use:
```SQL
SELECT *
FROM table_name;
```
# Homework
1. Prepare the link: https://sqlbolt.com/
2. Download [SQLite Browser](https://sqlitebrowser.org/)
3. Download [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)