# Definition
The `GROUP BY` clause groups records that have the same values in specified fields into aggregate data. It is typically used with [[05.Aggregate_functions]] (`Partial-I/Theory/05.Aggregate_functions.md`) to perform calculations on each group of records.
# Importance
The `GROUP BY` clause is essential for data analysis and reporting. It allows for summarizing large datasets, providing insights like totals, averages, and other aggregated metrics for specific categories (e.g., sales per region, average scores per class).
# Basic syntax
```SQL
SELECT 
	group_field_name, 
	AGGREGATE_FUNCTION(another_field_name)
FROM table_name
WHERE condition
GROUP BY group_field_name;
```
**Notes**:
- `SELECT group_field_name`: Choose the field(s) you want to display.
- `AGGREGATE_FUNCTION()`: Perform aggregate operations like `SUM()`, `COUNT()`, `AVG()`, etc.
- `FROM table_name`: Specify the table.
- `WHERE condition`: (Optional) Filters records **before** grouping them.
- `GROUP BY group_field_name`: Specifies the field(s) by which the result set is grouped.
## Examples
Take the reference of the following `employees` table

|    field    | data-type |
| :---------: | --------- |
| id_employee | `INT`     |
| department  | `TEXT`    |
|  job_title  | `TEXT`    |
|   salary    | `FLOAT`   |

1. Show each department and the number of employees in that department.

We need to count the number of employees (`id_employee`) in each department (`department`) in the `employees` table.
```SQL
SELECT 
	department,
	COUNT(id_employee) AS employee_count
FROM employees
GROUP BY department;
```
2. Count the number of employees for each combination of department and job title.

We need to group data by both `department` and `job_title`
```SQL
SELECT 
	department, 
	job_title, 
	COUNT(id_employee) AS employee_count
FROM employees
GROUP BY department, job_title;
```
3. Show, in average, which is the department that has the highest average salary.
- Take the average grouping by department
```SQL
SELECT
	department,
	AVG(salary) AS avg_sal
FROM employees
GROUP BY department;
```
- Order in descending and take the first record
```SQL
SELECT
	department,
	AVG(salary) AS avg_sal
FROM employees
GROUP BY department
ORDER BY avg_sal DESC
LIMIT 1;
```
## Exercise
#homework 
1. Made the [lesson 10](https://sqlbolt.com/lesson/select_queries_with_aggregates)
2. Submit to your GitHub account as **Tarea_02**.
	- The format must be: `TXT`, `SQL`, or `MD`.
3. After the review see the solutions in [[10]] (`Partial-I/Practice/SQLBolt/10.md`)
