---
tags:
  - SQL
---
The SQL Order Execution is the sequence in which the different clauses are executed in the queries.

Is important because:
- Optimizes the query performance
- Reduces the amount of data processing
- Helps in debugging and writing efficient queries

# Query syntax
The general query syntax is:
```SQL
-- Select fields
SELECT 
    field1, 
    field2, 
    AGGREGATE_FUNCTION(field3) AS alias_name, 
    ...
FROM 
	table_name1

-- Types of joins
[INNER | LEFT | RIGHT | FULL OUTER] JOIN table_name2
    ON table_name1.common_field = table_name2.common_field
    ...

-- Filtering records
WHERE 
    condition1 AND condition2 OR condition3 ...

-- Grouping records
GROUP BY 
    field1, field2, ...

-- Filtering groups
HAVING 
    AGGREGATE_FUNCTION(field4) condition ...

-- Sorting results
ORDER BY 
    field1 [ASC | DESC], field2 [ASC | DESC], ...

-- Limiting the number of records
LIMIT number_of_records OFFSET start_position;
```
# SQL order execution
But the order that the clauses are executed is the following:

1. **`FROM/JOIN`**:
    - The first step is to **identify the tables** involved in the query.
    - **Joins** between tables are processed here.
2. **`WHERE`**:
    - **Filters** records based on specified conditions.
    - Only records that meet the conditions proceed to the next step.
3. **`GROUP BY`**:
    - **Groups** records that have the same values in specified fields into summary records.
    - **Aggregate functions** are applied to these groups.
4. **`HAVING`**:
    - **Filters groups** based on conditions.
    - Similar to `WHERE`, but **operates on groups** created by `GROUP BY`.
5. **`SELECT`**:
    - **Selects the fields** to be included in the final result.
    - Can include aggregate functions and expressions.
6. **`DISTINCT`**:
	- Eliminate the **duplicated records.**
	- Works in the marked fields.
7. **`ORDER BY`**:
    - **Sorts** the result set based on specified fields.
    - Can sort in ascending (`ASC`) or descending (`DESC`) order.
8. **`LIMIT/OFFSET`**:
    - **Limits** the number of records returned by the query.
    - `OFFSET` specifies the number of records to skip before starting to return records.
# Example
## Query
```SQL
SELECT 
	department, 
	COUNT(employee_id) AS num_employees
FROM employees
WHERE active = 1
GROUP BY department
HAVING COUNT(employee_id) > 10
ORDER BY num_employees DESC
LIMIT 5;
```
## Order Execution
- **FROM**: `employees`
- **WHERE**: `active = 1`
- **GROUP BY**: `department`
- **HAVING**: `COUNT(employee_id) > 10`
- **SELECT**: `department, COUNT(employee_id) AS num_employees`
- **ORDER BY**: `num_employees DESC`
- **LIMIT**: `5`
