---
tags:
  - SQL
---
# SQL commands
SQL is a powerful language used for managing and manipulating relational databases. It consists of various commands that can be categorized into different types based on their functionality. These categories include **Data Definition Language** (DDL), **Data Manipulation Language** (DML), and **Data Query Language** (DQL).
## Data Query Language (DQL)

DQL commands are used to <u>query</u> and <u>retrieve</u> data from a database. The primary DQL command is:

- **`SELECT`**: Used to retrieve data from one or more tables.

Additional clauses often used with `SELECT` include:

- **`WHERE`**: Filters records based on specified conditions.
- **`GROUP BY`**: Groups records that have the same values in specified columns.
- **`HAVING`**: Filters groups based on specified conditions.
- **`FROM`**: Specifies the table to retrieve data from.
- **`ORDER BY`**: Sorts the result set in ascending or descending order.
- **`LIMIT`**: Specifies the number of records to return.
## Data Definition Language (DDL)

DDL commands are used to <u>define</u> and <u>modify</u> the structure of database objects such as tables, indexes, and views. 

Key DDL commands include:

- **`CREATE`**: Used to create new database objects.
```SQL
CREATE TABLE employees (
    id INT PRIMARY KEY,
    name VARCHAR(100),
    position VARCHAR(50)
);
```
- **`ALTER`**: Used to modify existing database objects.
```SQL
-- store numbers with up to 10 digits in total, including 2 digits after the decimal point
ALTER TABLE employees ADD COLUMN salary DECIMAL(10, 2);
```
- **`DROP`**: Used to delete database objects.
```SQL
DROP TABLE employees;
```
- **`TRUNCATE`**: Used to remove all records from a table, but keep its structure.
```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE employees;
```
- **`RENAME`**: Used to rename database objects.
```SQL
RENAME TABLE employees TO staff;
```

## Data Manipulation Language (DML)

DML commands are used to <u>manipulate</u> the data stored in database objects. Key DML commands include:

- **`INSERT`**: Used to add new records to a table.
```SQL
INSERT INTO 
	employees (id, name, position) 
VALUES 
	(1, 'John Doe', 'Manager');
```
- **`UPDATE`**: Used to modify existing records in a table.
```SQL
UPDATE 
	employees 
SET salary = 75000 
WHERE id = 1;
```
- **`DELETE`**: Used to remove records from a table.
```SQL
DELETE FROM 
	employees 
WHERE 
	id = 1;
```
**Note**: if you don't use the `WHERE` clause then you delete the whole table.