---
tags:
  - SQL
---
# What is it?
## Definition 1
Normalization is the <u>process of organizing data</u> in a database. It includes creating tables and **establishing relationships between** those tables according to rules designed both to protect the data and to make the database more flexible by <u>eliminating redundancy</u> and <u>inconsistent dependency</u>.

*Source*: [Microsoft](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/office/troubleshoot/access/database-normalization-description)
## Definition 2
Normalization is an important <u>process in database design</u> that helps improve the database’s *efficiency*, *consistency*, and *accuracy*. It makes it easier to <u>manage</u> and <u>maintain the data</u> and ensures that the database is adaptable to changing business needs.

Database normalization is the <u>process of organizing the attributes</u> of the database to <u>reduce</u> or <u>eliminate data redundancy</u> (having the same data but at different places). Data redundancy unnecessarily increases the size of the database as the same data is repeated in many places. <u>Inconsistency problems</u> also arise during *insert*, *delete*, and *update* operations. 

*Source*: [GeeksForGeeks](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/introduction-of-database-normalization/)
## Definition 3
Database normalization is a <u>database design principle for organizing data</u> in an organized and consistent way.

It helps you <u>avoid redundancy</u> and <u>maintain the integrity</u> of the database. It also helps you eliminate undesirable characteristics associated with *insertion*, *deletion*, and *updating*.

*Source*: [FreeCodeCamp](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/database-normalization-1nf-2nf-3nf-table-examples/)
## Our definition
Normalization is a **data design process** that organizes a database to avoid redundancy and inconsistent dependencies, making it easier to manage and maintain the data.
# Keys
For this topic is important to remember the different types of keys in a database:
- **Primary key** is a *field* that uniquely identifies the *records* of data in that table.
- **Foreign key** is a field that relates to the *primary key* in another table.
- **Composite key** is just like a primary key, but instead of having a field, it has multiple fields.
# Normal Forms
The Normal Forms are the steps to achieve the normalization. Each form is dependent on the previous one, and we say that a database is in a normal form if every table is in that formal form.
## First Form (1NF)
*Eliminate repeating groups*

A table is in **1NF** if every attribute in that relation is <u>single-valued attribute</u>:
- There is a **Primary Key** for identification.
- There are **not duplicate** fields or records.
- Each field only have one value for each record.

How to do it?
1. Eliminate repeating groups in individual tables.
2. Create a separate table for each set of related data.
3. Identify each set of related data with a primary key.
## Second Form (2NF)
*Eliminate redundancy*

A table is in **2NF** if:
- Is in **1NF**.
- Every non-primary-key attribute is fully functionally dependent on the primary key.

How to do it?
1. Create separate tables for sets of values that apply to multiple records.
2. Relate these tables with a foreign key.
## Third Form (3FN)
*Eliminate transitive partial dependency*

A table is in **3NF** if:
- Is in **2NF**.
- Have no transitive partial dependency.

How to do it?
1. Eliminate fields that don't depend on the key.

See the [example1](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/office/troubleshoot/access/database-normalization-description#normalizing-an-example-table) and [example2](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/database-normalization-1nf-2nf-3nf-table-examples/#heading-examples-of-1nf-2nf-and-3nf)

# More Normalization Forms
There are more normalization forms:
- **Fourth Normalization Form** or Boyce-Codd Normal Form (**BCNF**).
- **Fifth Normalization Form**
These forms avoid the possible exceptions that can occur in the first 3 forms.