---
tags:
  - time-series
  - Python
---
# Definition
 Stationarity means that the statistical properties of a process generating a time series *do not change over time*.
# Importance
Stationarity is a fundamental assumption for numerous time series models such as **ARIMA** (Auto Regression Integrated Moving Average) and **SARIMA** (Seasonal ARIMA). These models rely on the constancy of statistical properties like mean and variance over time. Non-stationary data can lead to unreliable model outputs and inaccurate predictions, just because the models aren’t expecting it.
## Important concepts
- **Lags**: For some specific data value $x_r$ in the time series $y$, we called the observation $x_{r-i}$ as the $i-th$ lag of $x_r$.
- **Autocorrelation**: this function measures the relationship between data points at different time lags, that means is the correlation between values in different times.
## Strong stationarity
Let $X$ be a discrete stochastic process. We called that the process $X$ is **strong stationary** if the distribution of a finite sub-sequence of random variables of $X$ remains the same as we shift it along the time index axis.

That means
$$F_X(x_{t_{1+\tau}}, x_{t_{2+\tau}},\ldots , x_{t_{n+\tau}})=F_X(x_{t_{1}}, x_{t_{2}},\ldots , x_{t_{n}})$$
## Weak stationarity
The process $X$ is **weak stationary** if:
- The first moment is constant.
- The second moment is finite.
- The autocovariance depends only on the difference $u-v$ i.e. $\forall u,a,v$
$$Cov(X_u,X_v)=Cov(X_{u+a},X_{v+a})$$
In other words, the covariance between any two data points is a function of their time lag.
# How to check stationarity
1. Plotting
2. [[04.Dickey-Fuller-Test]](`Partial-II/Theory/04.Dickey-Fuller-Test.md`)
## How to make a time series stationarity?
|  Time-series concept  |     Measure     |      Solution       |
| :-------------------: | :-------------: | :-----------------: |
|         Trend         |      Mean       |     Difference      |
| Seasonality variation |    Variance     |   $log$ function    |
|      Seasonality      | Autocorrelation | Seasonal difference |
# References
- [Definitions](https://towardsdatascience.com/stationarity-in-time-series-analysis-90c94f27322)
- [Explanation](https://hex.tech/blog/stationarity-in-time-series/)
