---
tags:
  - time-series
  - Python
---
# Test
**Dickey Fuller test** is a statistical test that is used to check for stationarity in time series. This is a type of **unit root** test, through which we find if the time series is having any unit root.
## Unit root
**Unit root** is a feature of time series that indicates if there is *any stochastic trend in the time series that drives it away from its mean value*. 

## Assumptions
The test is conducted under following assumptions:
1. **Null Hypothesis (H0)**: There exists a unit root in the time series and it is non-stationary. *Unit root* = 1 or $δ = 0$.
2. **Alternate Hypothesis (H1)**: There exists no unit root in the time series and it is stationary. *Unit root* < 1 or $δ < 0$.
## Interpretation
We interpret this result using the p-value from the test. A p-value below a threshold (such as 5% or 1%) suggests we reject the null hypothesis (stationary), otherwise a p-value above the threshold suggests we fail to reject the null hypothesis (non-stationary).
- $p-value > 0.05$: **Fail to reject** the null hypothesis (H0), the data has a unit root and is **non-stationary**.
- $p-value \leq 0.05$: **Reject** the null hypothesis (H0), the data does not have a unit root and is **stationary**.
# Python implementation
See the [official documentation](https://www.statsmodels.org/dev/generated/statsmodels.tsa.stattools.adfuller.html)

Import `adfuller` from `statsmodel.tsa.stattools` and use with your time series.

```python
# import adfuller
from statsmodels.tsa.stattools import adfuller

# use with the time series
result = adfuller(time_series)
```

**Returns**
- `adf` (`float`):The test statistic.
- `pvalue` (`float`): MacKinnon’s approximate p-value.
- `usedlag` (`int`): Number of lags used.
- `nobs` (`int`): The number of observations used for the ADF regression and calculation of the critical values.
- `critical values` (`dict`): Critical values for the test statistic at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels. Based on MacKinnon (2010).
- `icbest` (`float`): The maximized information criterion if *autolag* is not `None`.
- `resstore` (`ResultStore`, `optional`): A dummy class with results attached as attributes.