---
tags:
  - Python
  - time-series
---
# Autoregressive model
The Autoregressive (**AR**) model is a statical model that predicts future values based on the linear combination of past observations. 

In other words, the AR model in a time series is a regression model based on lags of the time series. 

This model is useful in time series where the current observations are correlated with past observations.
## Formula
So, base on the mention in [[2024-10-30]] (`Calendar/10_OCT/2024-10-30.md`) the **Simple Linear Regression** formula is:

$$y_i = \beta_0 + \beta_1x_i+\varepsilon_i$$
The formula for the Autoregressive model with one lag is:

$$y_t = \phi_0 + \phi_1y_{t-1} + \varepsilon_t$$
And the meaning is we are taking the value $y_t$ as a linear combination of its previous value. The number of observations that we used is called the *order* and it is represent between parenthesis. For example, the Autoregressive model of order 1 is denoted as $AR(1)$.

The formula for the $AR(p)$ is:

$$y_t = \phi_0 + \phi_1y_{t-1} + \phi_2y_{t-2} + \ldots + \phi_py_{t-p} + \varepsilon_t$$
**Note**: as in the Linear Regression the AR model suppose that the error follow a normal distribution i.e.

$$\varepsilon_t \sim N(0,\sigma^2)$$

# How to determine the order?
Firstable, the time series must be stationary. Check [[03.Stationarity]] (`Partial-II/Theory/03.Stationarity.md`)

Now we need to use the Partial Autocorrelation Function.

The recipe is: take the number of lags that surpass the confidence interval.

For more detail go to [[06.Autocorrelation]] (`Partial-II/Theory/06.Autocorrelation.md`)
